Previously
on when calls the heart...
Pleasure to meet
you, miss leveaux.
What brings you here?
You barely know
this elizabeth thatcher.
This is war.
I'm going to ruin you.
I received an offer
of a teaching position
I'm staying here.
This is where I belong.
[footsteps]
Is it true
You're taking another
teaching job back east?
Word spreads fast
in this town.
I have an offer.
Nothing more.
My family's doing.
They're worried about me.
Well, that's understandable,
With everything
that's gone on here.
And going on.
I've been thinking
a lot about this.
And you and rosemary,
you have a history.
And you have
a great deal in common.
That's not true.
From what I can see,
it is.
Elizabeth...
A man doesn't
propose to a woman
And get over it so easily.
To think long and hard
about your feelings
Before you make a decision
you might regret.
If that's what you want,
then I will.
It is.
Is that a squid?
[defensively]: It's a comet.
A comet? Uh...
May I?
Let's see.
You-- [sighs]
Comets...
Have tails, right?
Actually, it's just
evaporated materials and dust.
Well, let's call it a tail.
Thank you,
mr. Van gogh.
[chalk scraping board]
I can add a constellation
if you'd like?
How about
you remove a constable
What? So you can take credit
for my chalk work?
[door opening]
Good morning, children!
Be sure to admire
Mountie jack's artwork
on your way to your seats.
He enjoys
compliments.
Unlike miss thatcher,
Who is uncomfortable
with compliments,
Even though she's quite
deserving of them.
School is in session,
mr. Thornton.
If you'd like to speak,
Please raise your hand
like all of the other children.
[laughter]
May I be excused?
Yes, you may.
Thank you, miss thatcher.
All right.
Shall we begin?
Yeah!
[laughter]
Now, when we think
of astronomy,
We think of planets
and stars
And things far away.
But every 75 years,
Something special passes
over the night sky.
It's called halley's comet.
Now, sometime soon,
We'll be able
to look up in the sky
And see a fiery comet
passing over coal valley
As it orbits the sun.
Wow!
When will we know
to look up?
Well, we won't, exactly.
Comets aren't like stagecoaches,
they don't run on a schedule.
So I suggest
we all keep our eyes out,
Which means every night,
before you go to bed,
I want you to look up at the sky
toward the mountains.
Can my father see it
from heaven?
Oh...
I'm sure that he can.
And all
the other fathers--
Can they see it?
All of our loved ones
we've lost
Are watching over us...
Just as god is.
We can feel them
all around us,
Their love
and their guidance...
And that's not going to change.
All right, children.
Let's return to the skies.
Can you imagine a time
When man might travel
into outer space?
Why not a woman?
Sorry
for interrupting.
I overslept.
Oh, dear!
I can't remember the last time
I saw such a sad audience.
This isn't an audience,
miss leveaux.
What is it, then?
It's a classroom.
And who is to say a teacher
can't be entertaining?
Oh! So you're a teacher now,
Along with all of
your other occupations?
Well, I did teach music
for a spell in new york.
New york!
What's it like there?
In the evening,
Times square is filled
with music and lights
And people,
Even at midnight!
And the buildings
are so tall,
They touch the sky!
Which is exactly
what we're studying--
The sky.
And we really
should get back to it.
Oh. But I was just about
to tell them all
About coney island.
-Tell us!
-[overlapping]: Yeah!
[laughs briefly]
Miss thatcher?
[children]:
Please, miss thatcher?
[♪]
I feel like
I've been replaced.
Oh. That's not possible.
I'm afraid halley
doesn't stand a chance
Against
rosemary's comet.
Don't comets
burn out?
Not before setting fire
To everything
in their path.
Speaking
of setting fires--
Is it my imagination,
Or do you get prettier
with every passing day?
It's your
imagination.
And a little makeup.
[laughs]
and that hair...
And this dress.
And flowers
in the cafe.
A gift from bill.
He comes in
so frequently,
He thought it might
brighten the place up.
I'm sure that's
the only reason.
Maybe you're not
just mourning the past,
But looking toward
the future as well?
[sighs] perhaps.
But we can't forget
why he's here.
Wyatt!
Hello, miss thatcher,
mrs. Stanton.
Hello, wyatt.
You're working
on a Sunday?
My family needs the money.
I took over
wendell backus's shift.
He's sick.
That's very kind
of you.
The air down there's
hard to breathe
For some of the older miners.
I came to return these
before my shift.
Thank you.
Do you need more?
I haven't had much time
to read lately, ma'am.
Well,
whenever you do,
You are welcome
to my library.
Thank you.
These fragments are from
the point of explosion.
The sediment burns
Show the excessive level
of methane in the shaft.
Which means those men
Were sent into
a death trap.
It's looking that way.
Okay, thank you all
For coming out today
on your Sunday afternoon.
We're eager to know
Why you gathered
us here, mr. Miller.
Yes. Uh...
When I lost my leg,
I thought
I'd lost everything...
But what I really lost
was my spirit.
Now, I can't work
in that mine anymore,
But I believe I've found
another way to be useful.
Now, as some of you know,
I used to be a pretty good
with a hammer and nail,
So I took the liberty
Of drawing up some plans...
For a new church
and schoolhouse.
[quiet gasping]
Now, if we can just raise
a little money among us
For supplies,
I can build them,
And help bring coal valley
back to where it was--
A town with a...
With a proper church,
And a...And a school
that isn't inside a saloon.
This is a wonderful
idea, but...
I'm afraid no one
has much to spare.
I know I don't.
I understand,
being in the same predicament,
But we have to start somewhere.
[gowen]:
I think mr. Miller's plan
Is exactly
what this town needs.
And I'm sure
that the company would be...
More than happy to make
a sizeable donation.
What a magnanimous gesture,
mr. Gowen.
Well, thank you,
mrs. Ramsey,
But a magnanimous gesture
Would be to donate
the entirety of the money
And to pay
for mr. Miller's labor.
Unfortunately,
our reserves are tied up
Defending against
this frivolous investigation.
No investigation is frivolous
when 46 men are dead.
An unspeakable tragedy.
Yet I do have
to ask myself
If perhaps mr. Avery's judgment
may be clouded...
What with
your recent friendship.
Your insults
will not silence me,
Nor will your money.
[huffs]
Do we want to build
our town back up with a bribe?
If we take his money,
Then the company will own
more of us than they already do.
The company already
owns us, abigail.
The houses we live in,
The streets we walk on,
even your cafe,
Right?
At least we would have
a proper place to worship.
Without miners traipsing
through it at all hours.
I believe that children
can learn anywhere,
Be it in a schoolhouse
or in a saloon.
Abraham lincoln
learned in a log cabin.
Unfortunately,
your replacement may disagree.
My replacement?
Well, I assume...
Since you're leaving us.
Is that true?
No.
That is, it's true
I received an offer
of a position, but I haven't--
When were you planning
on telling us, miss thatcher?
Obviously
she wasn't.
Who's gonna teach us?
Oh, james, please.
Nothing's been decided at all.
You only just got here
a little while ago.
You said you'd watch
the comet with us.
And I will, james.
[grunting]
[gasps weakly and groans]
[door creaks open]
Bill!
Are you all right?
What happened?
Had a little unwanted visit
out at the mine.
They took my forensic kit
with all the evidence.
Did you get
a look at them?
They had masks.
Okay.
-You take care of him, will you?
-Yes. Of course.
I'm going with you.
You're in no condition.
I'm still your superior.
Well...
I'll make a note of
that in my report.
[door shuts]
This cut behind
your ear looks very deep.
I think you might
need some stitches.
The lengths
that I'll go to
To get you to make
a fuss over me.
You good with a needle?
I've made all
my own curtains.
Well, how about
sewing a person?
Well, we're about
to find out.
Ahem.
I'll get my sewing kit.
Jack?
[rip growls]
Woof.
You. How thrilling.
Well, you had better
get used to me.
Fine. Be that way.
Hmm!
Hmm...
And you'd better
get used to me too.
Jack.
Did you find them?
The trail went cold.
Too dark to be searching.
Well, I'm glad
you're back safely.
Were you worried
I wouldn't be?
No.
Yet you're out here in
the middle of the night waiting.
If you must know,
I was just watching
for halley's comet.
Halley's comet.
Do you know how many times
I've heard that excuse?
Maybe I was a little worried.
Just a little?
Don't push it.
[chuckles]
I heard what happened
at the town meeting.
I'm sorry.
Thank you.
I want you to know...
Whether you decide
to leave or stay,
I-I'll support you.
You deserve to teach
in a real school,
Elizabeth, not a...
Not a saloon.
But I-I have faith that
that will happen here
Sooner than later.
The schoolhouse
doesn't really matter to me.
It's the children.
This town needs you, elizabeth.
Not just this town.
It's getting late.
I should probably turn in.
Of course.
Good morning,
wyatt.
Good morning, miss thatcher.
Do you have a minute?
Of course!
I wanted
to show you something.
How does it...Work?
Oh, my goodness.
Oh! It's wonderful!
Where did you get this?
[clicks off]
I made it.
You did?
I got the idea
from your physics books,
And the phonograph.
If I could create
a bigger version,
It could help circulate
the air in the mine,
Help people
breathe better.
Maybe even prevent
another disaster
By venting
the dust and gas.
And the blades
are made out of wood
So that there's no risk
for a spark.
I wasn't wrong about you,
was I?
You are really quite
an extraordinary young man.
Have you shown this to anyone?
Just my mother.
Made her cry.
She was upset?
No. Happy.
Does that make sense?
Oh.
Sometimes we women
cry when we're happy,
Sometimes we cry
when we're sad,
And sometimes
for no reason at all.
Crying can be good,
Bad,
or mean nothing at all?
Exactly.
I may know science,
But I'll never
understand women.
[chuckling]
I think most men
would agree with you.
Now, then.
I'd like to telegram
my father's patent attorney
About your fan.
If you'd like
to leave it here,
The constable can take
a photograph for us.
Thank you,
miss thatcher.
[door opens]
A smile always
means something good.
...I'd better check.
[door opens]
Hiding behind your desk?
Mr. Avery.
Well, it appears as if
you've been injured.
Don't bother
acting surprised.
I just wanted to let you know,
your threats won't stop me.
Oh, I'm not surprised.
And was that
another unwarranted accusation?
What am I guilty of now?
Well, if my hunch is right,
Assault and theft
by your henchmen.
I don't have henchmen.
And I don't control
the people in this town.
I beg to differ.
If you close this mine,
The men here
won't get paid.
And if they don't
get paid,
Then their wives can't
put food on the table.
That would be
motivation enough
For a lot of
people in this town
I know it was you,
and I mean to prove it.
Just like I'm going to prove
That you knew
that shaft was unsafe.
Ah, that'll open
a whole can of worms.
I like worms.
Good for fishing.
'cause I feel like I'm about
to catch something pretty big.
Well, you best get to it, then.
But I have a feeling
That all you're gonna do
is further hurt abigail stanton.
The people
in this town,
They think of her
very fondly.
I, for one,
Would hate
for that to change.
Wouldn't you?
You best be very careful
right now, gowen.
Unless you plan on
arresting mr. Gowen,
I suggest you take
your hands off him.
Apparently
you do have henchmen.
Tell me something, boys.
Those standard-issue boots?
They're for
your security firm?
[♪]
[applause]
Oh, thank you!
Thank you.
You're all so kind.
Are there
any requests?
Well, I'd like
to perform a song
That was playing when I received
a proposal of marriage
From a man I used to love...
And still do.
[♪]
♪ you made me love you
♪ I didn't wanna do it
♪ I didn't wanna
do it ♪
♪ you made me want you
♪ and all the time
you knew it ♪
♪ I guess
you always knew it ♪
♪ you made me happy
♪ sometimes
♪ you made me glad
♪ but there were times, dear
♪ you made me feel so bad
[♪]
You didn't
like the song?
I used to.
When it meant something.
We need to talk.
I'd love to.
About elizabeth.
Or we could just sit in
companionable silence.
I've been doing
some soul-searching,
And I can't deny
you showing up here
Has thrown me
for a loop.
You are quite
something, rosie.
You were once
the woman of my dreams,
And I suppose
it's only natural
That-- that old memories
might filter back in.
But elizabeth and I,
we have a relationship.
What kind
of relationship?
I-I don't know,
exactly,
But I know it's
the one I want to pursue.
And would
a true relationship
Be so easily sidetracked
by my presence?
Your presence could
sidetrack an army.
[laughs]
You barely know this
elizabeth thatcher.
Jack, you and I,
We've known each other
a lifetime.
I've been doing some
soul-searching too.
And I realized
That the only thing
that's ever felt real to me
Is you.
What? Do you doubt my words?
Well, you've always been
a good actress.
Thank you.
It wasn't a compliment.
Well, I'm gonna
take it as one.
Have you told her
all of this?
No. Not yet.
Well, until you do,
I'll retain a shred of hope.
Isn't that what
coal valley's all about?
Hope?
[♪]
So, I've got
some exciting news to share.
Thanks to the generosity
of an anonymous donor,
We will begin
construction tomorrow
On coal valley's
new church and schoolhouse.
[gasping and applauding]
I assume that we have
mr. Gowen to thank for this?
Oh, uh... Well...
I'm not at liberty
To disclose the donor,
but...
I do feel obligated to say
that it was not mr. Gowen.
Elizabeth?
Was it your father?
No, it wasn't.
But I believe it was from
someone equally as generous,
With far less money
to spare.
Doesn't "anonymous"
mean anonymous anymore?
[laughs]
You donated
your reward money?
All of it?
For a church?
And a school.
Well, that is so...
...Noble!
Three cheers
for the constable!
Hip, hip, hooray!
No, please sit down.
Uh, folks...
Let's not overdo it, please.
I was just doing my job,
And what better way
to spend that reward money
Than to help the people
of coal valley,
Who have all become
very important to me.
Especially, uh,
one person in particular.
Thank you, jack.
And your generosity,
Well, has made me
all the more fond of you.
[gowen]: May I offer
my own words of gratitude
To the constable?
Not only have you made
our town a safer place,
But I think we can all agree,
a better place.
Now, since we're all
gathered here together,
I have an announcement
to make.
Unfortunately,
it is not a happy one,
But I do believe it is something
that needs to be said.
This is mr. Gentry.
He is the company lawyer,
And he is in possession
of documents
Which, now, I did not
want to bring to light,
But it would seem
That mrs. Stanton
has forced my hand.
What hand would
that be, mr. Gowen?
The one that write
checks to silence us,
Or the one that ordered
the attack on mr. Avery?
Does mr. Avery not
wish to speak for himself?
Mr. Avery has gone
to get the circuit judge
To bring you to justice.
Well, that is good news.
But the judge will not
be presiding over my trial.
These documents prove
That the guilt
for the terrible tragedy
Which befell our town
Lies with one man--
Noah stanton.
Your husband
was the superintendent.
It was his decision
to lead those men into the mine,
Knowing full well
conditions were unsafe.
Noah would've never
done something like that.
You are way out of line, gowen.
Constable, let's let
the judge decide that.
I started this investigation,
not mrs. Stanton,
And I'm gonna see
That it's finished
based on evidence--
Not hearsay
and finger-pointing.
I know that you
want to believe
What mrs. Stanton
is saying.
She's kind,
And charming,
And she makes the best biscuits
that any of us have ever tasted,
But her husband
was a risk-taker,
And his reputation
preceded him.
That's why he was fired
by the lee mining company
Prior to his arrival
in coal valley.
He wasn't fired.
He quit because
the working conditions
Were deplorable.
That's not
what his records show.
Then those records
are fabricated,
You know
that your husband's salary
Was associated with
the amount of coal
That his men dug out
of that mine every day.
That shaft carried
a very rich deposit.
Noah didn't care about money.
You can ask anyone here.
You may not have known,
but your husband was in debt.
Deeply in debt, I'm afraid.
Desperation can cause a man
to take a great many risks.
Noah stanton
was desperate for money.
Desperate enough
to lead his men,
And his own son,
into that mine,
And to their graves.
Good people of coal valley...
What message was
noah stanton sending
When we found this
after the disaster?
What was once
a symbol of hope...
May now be
an admission of guilt.
[abigail]: You all knew noah.
There wasn't anything
he wouldn't have done
For any of you.
The truth
will come out.
Rest assured,
Gowen will not succeed.
Oh, I'm afraid
he already has.
Did you see the way they
were all looking at me?
You'll have your say in court,
and they'll hear you then.
Oh, I pray you're right,
elizabeth,
Because right now
I feel
As if I'm losing everything
all over again.
You won't lose me.
You're a true friend.
[chuckles]
Perhaps the only one
I've got.
No.
You have many friends.
You'll see.
They'll be standing
alongside you
When the time comes.
I'm not so sure.
Noah did talk
of buying a claim.
He wanted to start
his own business.
Well, that doesn't
prove anything.
Unless it caused him
To do something
he wouldn't normally do.
I didn't get to meet noah.
But from everything
I've heard,
He was a good and decent man.
You must continue
to believe that.
[horse whinnies]
The judge got
stuck on a case
In cooperville.
He'll be in on
tomorrow's stagecoach.
Judge farrell, I'm hoping?
I'm afraid not.
Judge black.
-Jedidiah black?
-Yes.
I know him
only too well.
Tell me.
Are the stories about him true?
He once sentenced
a man to hang.
The man jumped the rail in court
to attack him,
And he pulled out his pistol
and shot him right there.
In his defense,
as quick as he is with a pistol,
He's just as quick with a gavel.
Well, let's hope it's swinging
in the right direction.
Last night, gowen managed
to sway half the town
That noah stanton's to blame
for the explosion.
I'm going
to see abigail.
[sighing]
[door opens]
How are you?
Well, I've been better,
And I've been worse.
I heard what happened
with gowen.
I'm sorry I wasn't here.
Would you like to sit down?
As you can see,
you have your choice of tables.
When the truth
comes out,
And it will,
This place
will be filled again.
So much so, you'll
have to open another room.
Right now, I'd give anything
just to have one customer.
You have me.
[door opens]
And you've got me.
And me.
I don't know about
the rest of you,
But I'm starving.
[sighs]
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
No, don't thank us.
You're the one who has to cook.
[chuckling]
[avery]:
I'll help.
You cook?
But you're not a doctor,
and you stitched me.
Ah. Touche.
Jack?
Can we talk?
We can.
Though no matter
what I say,
You seem to hear
something different.
Well, then
let me say it.
Last year,
I was in a play,
The lead, of course,
Who was in love
with someone else's man.
The part never suited me.
In fact, I was quite relieved
when the show ended.
Well, are you saying
your performance in coal valley
Is coming to an end?
Let's just say
the curtain has fallen.
On this act, at least.
So you're leaving
on the stagecoach tomorrow?
Unless something, or...
Someone stops me.
[clears throat]
[chuckles]
I'm sorry, rosemary.
So am I.
Oh!
Oh, my goodness!
Either you all are very early,
or I am very late.
We wanted to get here
before you, miss thatcher.
Oh...
"they are not long,
The days of wine and roses--
Out of a misty dream,
Our path emerges for a while,
Then closes within a dream."
That poem was from
our first week together.
Oh...
It's...
It's halley's comet.
Oh, how lovely.
This is from all of us.
[gasps softly]
[sighs] oh...
Tears of sadness
or happiness,
Miss thatcher?
Both.
Oh, I just love you all
so much.
And you have taught me
More than
you will ever know.
But I want you to know
that I have...
Made a decision.
[sighs]
I'm not leaving you.
Not now
and not ever.
We love you too,
miss thatcher.
Are you staying
because of us,
Or because
of mountie jack?
That is a very
inappropriate question, gabe.
Then it is mountie jack!
[laughter and cheering]
Oh, children!
Hope is in the air.
That
and a little coal dust.
Welcome to coal
valley, your honor.
I'm constable
jack thornton,
And this is
abigail stanton.
Nice to have made
your acquaintance, miss.
Ma'am.
Jedidiah black.
Your reputation
proceeds you, judge.
[chuckles]
Well, unfortunately,
most of it's true.
Stanton, huh?
You're one of the widows?
Uh, yes, sir.
Waiting a long time
for our day in court.
Well, it's here now.
I can't promise
you're gonna like the results.
I can
vouch for that.
Well, it's been a long time,
if I recall correctly.
You still holding a grudge
over a poker game?
Only till
I win it back.
Well, you might have
quite a wait, son.
You got a witness list?
In my room.
Well, you might get it. Now.
Why don't you let me?
I was going there anyway.
Thank you, abigail.
It's in my satchel.
[driver]:
Judge?
I trust you had
a safe ride in?
Well, considering I got
out of cooperville alive,
Well, it doesn't sound
all that good either.
Justice prevailed.
That's what matters.
You expecting someone?
Yeah. Always.
You make a lot of enemies
on this job.
You got a saloon here?
We do.
Poker?
We got that too.
Trial starts at eight.
Sharp.
[man]:
Whoo! Today's the day!
Black! It's time
to meet your maker!
[whap]
So apparently
his little brother here
Don't agree
that justice prevailed.
Lock him up, constable.
Put him on my docket
for tomorrow.
[sighs]
Elizabeth?
[exhales]
Take a walk with me.
Is there a reason
for this walk?
There is.
I have been doing
some reflecting
And some reading.
In fact, I borrowed
one of your history books.
Really?
-Yeah.
-[she laughs]
Did you know that,
of the 27 men
That have been president
of the United States,
Only one
was a bachelor?
Mm-hmm.
James buchanan.
Okay, but can
you name one
Notable accomplishment
of buchanan's?
[laughs] actually,
His failure to deal
with the south's succession
Is considered one of the worst
presidential mistakes
In history.
My point exactly.
What is your point?
That perhaps
his poor judgment began
By not having
a woman by his side.
It was because he was
a confederate sympathizer.
Is there anything
you don't know?
I don't know the reason
for this conversation.
I think you do.
You're running
for president?
[he chuckles and sighs]
Is that a gift
to say goodbye?
I-I didn't bring you up here
to say goodbye.
Open it.
You made this?
A little hobby of mine.
It's a lot harder for me
to say what's in my heart.
I guess I'm not as brave
as everyone thinks.
Yes you are.
Elizabeth,
I have thought long and hard
about us,
As promised,
And I-- I keep coming back
to the same conclusion.
You're the one.
You're the only one.
And I know I said
that I'd support you
Whatever
you decide to do...
But I didn't mean it.
Don't go.
I'm not going anywhere, jack.
[♪]
This is where I belong.
[elizabeth, writing]:
And so I have resolved
To make this place my home.
There will be
difficult days ahead,
No doubt.
And uncertain ones.
But I have faith
That true happiness
awaits me here in coal valley,
For what is life
But a bittersweet mix
of sadness...
Wonderment...
Hope...
And joy?
[man]: Hyah!
Giddyup!
Elizabeth.
I-I just wanted to say
That despite whatever
has passed between us,
I wish you all the best.
And I you.
Perhaps we could part
as friends, then?
Friends it is.
Are you headed
back to new york?
Someday.
Where are you headed, then?
Well, for now,
I'm only moving down the street
to a nicer room.
I don't understand.
The mayor has agreed to help me
start a theater group.
Here?
Yes! Isn't it wonderful?
I'll be staying in coal valley,
after all.
Seems we'll be seeing
a lot more of each other.
Wonderful.